---
layout: post
title:  "CFP: Minimal Computing Workshop (DH2016)"
date:   2016-03-11 04:00:00
category: blog
---

Scheduled for 12 July 2016, in [Krakow, Poland](http://dh2016.adho.org/), this Digital Humanities 2016 workshop will
explore the practice and influence of minimal computing from both a
practical and theoretical perspective. We use “minimal computing” to
refer to computing done under some set of significant constraints,
including constraints of hardware, software, education, network
capacity, infrastructure, and power. Minimal computing is also used to
capture the maintenance, refurbishing, and use of machines to do work
out of necessity, along with the choice to use streamlined computing
hardware, such as Raspberry Pi or Arduino.

In essence, it calls for the reduction of the technical infrastructure
required to produce, disseminate, and preserve digital scholarship. Put
this way, it can reduce external dependencies (such as reliance on
proprietary software, network infrastructure, or complex technology
stacks), help communities to assert some control over their content, and
facilitate sharing and preservation. This dichotomy of choice versus
necessity underscores technology that is arguably not the
high-performance computing of high-income economies. By operating within
this tension between choice and necessity, minimal computing brings
important concepts and practices within digital humanities to the fore.
In this way it is also an intellectual concept, akin to
environmentalism, asking for balance between gains and costs in areas
including social justice, manufacturing, waste, and labor.

Despite its fundamental concerns, minimal computing still lacks a cogent
research agenda within digital humanities. As such, this workshop aims
to bring like-minded researchers from a variety of disciplines to the
same space to share work in progress and collectively articulate lines
of future inquiry.

Papers 
-------

For the workshop, we invite short papers or thought pieces (500-2000
words) engaging questions such as:

-   What are best practices for application construction in order to
    > maximize access, decrease obsolescence, and reduce e-waste?

-   How and in what ways does experience in mid- and low-income
    > economies inform ongoing assumptions about how research and
    > collaboration are conducted in high-income economies?

-   In terms of computing and culture, what meaningful differences
    > emerge across economical, infrastructural, and material
    > conditions?

-   In and beyond digital humanities, what is implied by minimalist
    > design, and to what effects on practice?

-   In digital humanities and other contexts, what research is being
    > conducted with which physical computing technologies, how, and
    > why?

-   How do the different histories of minimalism in art, design, and
    > industry form genealogies for minimalism in computers? Or what
    > interesting work are people currently doing with minimal computing
    > in areas such as art, design, and experimental media?

Papers may be anchored in existing minimal computing projects, or they
may be more theoretical or historical in character.

Submission (by 1 May 2016) 
---------------------------

To respond to this call for papers, please submit a 250-word abstract to
Jentery Sayers (University of Victoria) at
[*jentery@uvic.ca*](mailto:jentery@uvic.ca). Together with the abstract,
please include your name, email address, and affiliation. Please include
the abstract in the body of your email. Do not include any attachments
or links to Google Drive, Dropbox, GitHub, or the like. Abstracts are
due by 1 May 2016.

Format 
-------

Accepted papers will be published online at least two weeks prior to the
workshop. This way, workshop participants may read the papers in advance
and come prepared with questions and comments.

On 12 July 2016, the workshop will blend delivery of short papers (or
thought pieces) with seminar discussion, demonstrations, and prototype
testing.

**9:30am-12:30pm**: The first half of the workshop will consist of 8-10
presentations, together with focused discussion of the presenters’
minimal computing projects. Presentations and projects will be drawn
from responses to this CFP.

**12:30pm-1:30pm**: Lunch (on our own; not provided)

**1:30pm-4:00pm**: Participants will collectively develop a research
agenda for minimal computing, with all participants collaborating to
identify projects, build ideas, share and test prototypes, and
articulate collective interests. Where applicable, participants will
demonstrate workflows and projects involving physical computing
platforms such as Raspberry Pi and Arduino.

Organizers 
-----------

The organizing team for this workshop is Tiffany Chan (University of
Victoria), Alex Gil (Columbia University), Kim Martin (University of
Guelph), Brian Rosenblum (University of Kansas), and Jentery Sayers
(University of Victoria).

Should you have any questions about the workshop, then please do not
hesitate to contact Jentery Sayers at
[*jentery@uvic.ca*](mailto:jentery@uvic.ca).
 